# When news make history
## The Pacific chapter of World War II according to The New York Times and Le Temps 
EPFL - Applied Data Analysis project 
nbviewer link http://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/jshwl/epfl-ada/blob/master/project-ada/project.ipynb
# Abstract
The information we have access to defines the way we perceive the world. News media and journals in particular have contributed, since their very inception, to the spread of knowledge, influencing public opinion and setting the foundations for what we call history today. This project aims at extracting how events were reported from newspapers archives in order to enliven crucial historic events. More specifically we focus on the Asian-Pacific theatre of World War II.
The data we are going analyze derives from two main sources: the “200 years news (Le Temps)” and the TimesMachine datasets. The former is the full archive of the last 200 years of two Swiss newspapers, Journal de Genève and Gazette de Lausanne, the predecessors of the nationwide newspaper Le Temps. The latter is the online archive of all the New York Times issues covering from 1851 to 2002. 


# Research questions
- How complete can a historical model drawn only from newspapers be? How different it can be from what we know? Are there significant inaccuracies? Why?
- Does information generated by different countries diverge? 
- How important were international news in the previous century?
- Can historical events be made more appealing by means of data visualizations?


# Dataset
- * "The New York Times" online archive and the "TimesMachine" (also through the available APIs)
- * "200 years news" (Le Temps) dataset on the EPFL cluster 

# A list of internal milestones up until project milestone 3

- Sketch of preliminary version of the datastory (https://github.com/jshwl/epfl-ada/blob/master/project-ada/datastory.png)

- Improve the news filtering method (as stated in the notebook)
- Information extraction based on named-entity recognition for french and english documents
- Mapping articles or quantities of references to cities/countries
- Generate maps for each year covering 1937-1945

# Tasks

- Joseph Vavalà: Data retrieval, report, information extraction, filtering and dictionaries, preliminary data analysis.
- Foivos Anagnou: Data retrieval, report, coming up with the algorithms, test running.
- Lkham: Map creation and plotting,